[Applause]
I'm thrilled to be talking to you by
this high-tech method
of all
of all lived the overwhelming majority
would have found what we're doing here
incomprehensible unbelievable
because for thousands of centuries in
the dark time before the Scientific
Revolution and the enlightenment
people had low expectations for their
lives for their descendants lives
typically they expected nothing
significantly new or better to be
achieved ever
this pessimism
famously appears in the Bible in one of
the few biblical passages with a named
author it's called
he's an enigmatic chap
he wrote
what has been is what will be
and what has been done is what will be
done
there is nothing new Under the Sun
is there something of which it is said
look this is new
now that thing was already done in the
ages that came before us
because Helen was describing a world
without novelty
by novelty I mean something new in
Kohler's sense not merely something
that's changed but a significant change
with lasting effects
where people really would say look this
is new
and preferably good
so purely random changes aren't novelty
okay heraclitus did say a man can't step
in the same river twice because it's not
the same river he's not the same man but
if the river is changing randomly
it really is the same river
in contrast if an idea in a mind spreads
to other minds and changes lives for
Generations that is novelty
human life without novelty is life
without creativity without progress
it's a static Society a zero-sum game
that was the living hell in which
kohelet lived like everyone until a few
centuries ago
it was hell because
for humans
suffering is intimately related to
staticity because staticity isn't just
frustrating
all sources of suffering famine
pandemics incoming asteroids
and things like war and slavery
hurt people only until we have created
the knowledge to prevent them
there's a story in Somerset morms novel
of human bondage about an ancient Sage
who summarizes the entire history of
mankind
as he was born
he suffered and he died
and it goes on
life was insignificant and death without
consequence
and indeed
the overwhelming majority of humans
who've ever lived had lives of suffering
and grueling labor before dying young
and in agony
and yes in most Generations
nothing had any novel consequence for
subsequent Generations
nevertheless
when ancient people tried to explain
their condition
they typically did so in grandiose
Cosmic terms which was the right thing
to do as it turns out even though their
actual explanations their their myths
were largely false
some tried to explain the grimness and
monotony of their world in terms of an
endless Cosmic war between good and evil
in which humans were the Battleground
which neatly explained why their own
experience was full of suffering and why
progress never happened
but
it wasn't true
amazingly enough
all their conflict and suffering were
just due to the way they processed ideas
being satisfied with dogma and Just So
Stories rather than criticizing them and
trying to guess better explanations of
the world and of their own condition
20th century physics did create better
explanations
but still in terms of a cosmic War this
time the competence were Order and Chaos
or entropy that story
does allow for Hope for the future
but in another way it's even Bleaker
than the ancient myths because the
villain entropy is preordained to have
the final victory
when the inexorable laws of
thermodynamics shut down all novelty
with the so-called heat death of the
universe
currently there's a story of a local
battle in that war between
sustainability which is order
and wastefulness which is chaos that's
the Contemporary take on Good and Evil
often with the added twist that humans
are the evil so we shouldn't even try to
win
and recently there have been Tales of
another Cosmic war between gravity which
collapses the universe and dark energy
which finally shreds it so this time
whichever of those Cosmic forces wins
we lose
all those pessimistic accounts of The
Human Condition
contain some truth but as prophecies
they're all misleading and all for the
same reason none of them portrays humans
as what we really are as Jacob bronowsky
said
man is not a figure in the landscape he
is the shaper of the landscape in other
words humans are not playthings of
cosmic forces we are users of cosmic
forces I'll say more about that in a
moment but first what sorts of thing
create novelty well the beginning of the
universe surely did the Big Bang nearly
14 billion years ago created space time
and energy everything physical and then
immediately what I call the first era of
novelty with the first atom the first
star the first black hole the first
Galaxy
but then at some point
novelty vanished from the universe
perhaps from as early as 12 or 13
billion years ago right up to the
present day there's never been any new
kind of astronomical object there's only
been what I call the great monotony
so kahelit was accidentally
even more right about the universe
beyond the Sun than he was about under
the sun
so long as the great monotony lasts what
has been out there really is what will
be and there is nothing out there of
which it can truly be said look this is
new
nevertheless
at some point during the Great monotony
there was an event
inconsequential at the time and even
billions of years later it had affected
nothing Beyond its home planet
it eventually it could cause cosmically
momentous novelty that event was the
origin of life
creating the first genetic knowledge
coding for biological adaptations
coding for novelty
on Earth it utterly transformed the
surface genes in the DNA of
single-celled organisms put oxygen in
the air extracted CO2 put chalk and iron
ore into the ground hardly a cubic inch
of the surface to some depth has
remained unaffected by those genes
the Earth became
if not a novel place on the cosmic scale
certainly a weird one just as an example
beyond Earth only a few hundred
different chemical substances have been
detected presumably there are some more
in lifeless locations but on Earth
Evolution created billions of different
chemicals and then the first plants
animals and then
in some ancestor species of ours
explanatory knowledge for the first time
in the universe for all we know
explanatory knowledge is the defining
adaptation of our species
it differs from the non-explanatory
knowledge in DNA for instance by being
Universal that is to say whatever can be
understood
can be understood through explanatory
knowledge and more
any physical process can be controlled
by such knowledge limited only by the
laws of physics
and so explanatory knowledge too
has begun to transform the Earth's
surface
and soon the Earth will become the only
known object in the universe that turns
aside incoming asteroids instead of
attracting them
cohelet was understandably misled by the
painful slowness of progress in his day
novelty in human life was still too rare
too gradual to be noticed in one
generation and in the biosphere the
evolution of Novel species was even
slower but both things were happening
now
why is there a great monotony in the
universe at large and what makes our
planet buck that trend
well the universe at large is relatively
simple
stars are so simple that we can predict
their behavior billions of years into
the future and retrodict how they formed
billions of years ago
so why is the universe simple basically
it's because
big massive powerful things strongly
affect lesser things and not vice versa
I call that the hierarchy rule for
example when a comet hits the sun the
sun carries on just as before but the
comet is vaporized
for the same reason
big things are not much affected by
small parts of themselves
I.E by details
which means that their overall behavior
is simple
and since nothing very new can happen to
things that remain simple
the hierarchy rule by causing
large-scale Simplicity has caused the
Great monotony
but
the Saving Grace is
the hierarchy rule is not a law of
nature
it just happens to have held so far in
the universe except here in our
biosphere
molecule-sized objects genes control
vastly disproportionate resources the
first genes for photosynthesis by
causing their own proliferation and then
transforming the surface of the planet
have violated or reversed the hierarchy
rule by the mind-blowing factor of 10 to
the power 40.
explanatory knowledge is potentially far
more powerful because of universality
and more rapidly created
when human knowledge has achieved a
factor 10 to the 40. it will pretty much
control the entire galaxy and will be
looking Beyond
so humans
and any other explanation creators who
may exist out there are the Ultimate
Agents of novelty
for the universe
where the reason and the means by which
novelty and creativity knowledge
progress
can have objective large-scale physical
effects
from the human perspective
the only alternative to that living hell
of static societies is continual
creation
of new ideas Behaviors new kinds of
objects this robot will soon be obsolete
because of new explanatory knowledge
progress
but from the cosmic perspective
explanatory knowledge is the Nemesis of
the hierarchy rule it's the destroyer of
the great monotony
so it's the creator of the next
cosmological era the anthropocene
if one can speak of a cosmic War it's
not the one portrayed in those
pessimistic stories it's a war between
monotony and Novelty between stasis and
creativity
and in this war
our side is not destined to lose
if we choose to apply our unique
capacity to create explanatory knowledge
we could win
thanks
foreign